Dear Editor,
Enclosed please find my manuscript entitled "Predicting recreational water quality advisories: A
comparison of statistical methods", co-authored with Mr. Steven R. Corsi, Ms. Rebecca B. Carvin, and Dr.
Michael N. Fienen. We would appreciate your consideration for its possible publication in Water
Research.

Over the years, use of models for real-time prediction of water quality exceedances at beaches using 
statistical models driven by multiple variables that describe environmental variability has become quite 
common. The standard technique that has been used in the past is ordnary least squares regression, but 
numerous other statistical techniques have been used as well. Several efforts have been undertaken to 
compare some of these methods, but have all been quite limited in scope with few beaches and only a few 
of the methods. With numerous modeling approaches in consideration and the fact that each beach has different 
environmental influences, a more comprehensive evaluation of statistical methods over numerous beaches is needed.

In this manuscript, we have evaluated fourteen statistical modeling methods at seven beaches with a varying set 
of land use profiles. A significant result is that the most common method (OLS regression) is most commonly the 
least accurate method. Gradient boosting machines (GBM) was found to be the most accurate for the majority of these seven beaches.

Another significant outcome is that the three methods that are included in the latest version of the EPA and USGS recreational 
water qualtiy model development software "Virtual Beach 3.0". This software is widely used by beach managers for 
providing "now-casting" results for daily beach advisory determination. GBM is one of the new methods that was included in 
Virtual Beach 3.0.

For these reasons, we feel that this manuscript will prove to be important to recreational water practitioners
and help them make informed decisions on predicitve modeling activities.


Thank you.
Yours sincerely,
Wesley Brooks
United States Geological Survey
Wisconsin Water Science Center
Middleton, WI



